<link href="../../markdown.css" rel="stylesheet"></link> 

# 1.2 Why study "Digital Music?"
*Is this a thing?*

When I first proposed my doctoral thesis topic, on the problem of "technological obsolescence" in the area of interactive electroacoustic music, my clarinet teacher cocked his head and asked, "is this a thing?"

Well, interactive electroacoustic music is a very thin branch of contemporary classical music, but one with a fairly long history, and if technological obsolescence wasn't such a persistent problem, a rich repertoire as well. So yes, it's a thing. My interest was in concert works for clarinet and interactive electronics -- music composed for a standard instrument, but accompanied by often experimental and non-standard technologies that need to function on stage if the work is to be performed. You can read more about that work <a href = "https://dbw.live-website.com/research/dma-dissertation-2004/">here. </a>

The point is that I learned things about *music* by studying how music and technology interact. I also learned things about *technology* by employing it for my art. This work required a truly *interdisciplinary* approach, in which musical performance practice, computer science, and software/sound engineering were all part of the same thing. When a technology is worth pursuing, it *reveals* things about the world around us.

## STEAM Education
*Science, Technology, Engineering, ARTS, and Mathematics*

Many people ask, **"Why are the Arts important?"** Why not concentrate on "practical" subjects like science and math, and leave the "extra" *artsy* stuff to the handful of dreamers and privileged types that can afford it?

**Here's a better question** - Why aren't the arts *central* to our exploration of technical subjects? 

After all, the creation of art often requires at least some contact with disciplines typically considered part of STEM. In any computer-based art form, that is especially true. 

In order to create music with a computer, you will need to define the sounds, specify parameters, and possibly develop algorithms to guide the generation of musical ideas. It also requires a basic understanding of the science of sound and some understanding of the theoretical concepts upon which it rests. 

Therefore, digital music (or "computer music," "music technology," "electroacoustic music," or whatever you want to call it) is inherently a "STEAM" subject. Digital Music isn't just a way to dress up the dry study of computer science and audio theory. 

**In Digital Music, the point is to make something musical and expressive.** The rest (the science, technology, engineering, and math) follows according to the requirements of the artistic vision or task.

## Digital Music is for Everyone
*How does the "non" musician or non-programmer participate?*

Digital technology in music has always had this promise of expanding our horizons. 

Once upon a time, computer music was the domain of highly trained specialists toiling away in obscure studios making noises that most people found weird. Those pioneers were looking for the edges of possibility when it came to sonic timbre, control, and organizational complexity. 

Then digital music technology went main stream sometime in the 1980s (with the advent of MIDI), and suddenly the ability to create and play didn't require a PhD in mathematics any more. Every decade since has seen an increase in access to more and more powerful musical production tools, to the point where bedroom producers with a laptop and some microphones can compete with the big-time studios for space on your playlist. 

In the past ten years, another quiet revolution has been brewing with the advent of the Web Audio API -- a set of web browser capabilities for sound generation and processing that has the potential to put sophisticated digital music creative tools in the hands of anyone with a web browser. Web developers can build complex musical web-apps with nothing more than some JavaScript code attached to a web page. That last innovation makes this class possible.