<link href="../../markdown.css" rel="stylesheet"></link> 

# Introduction
*Art is the intersection of technique and imagination*

This course is for non-specialists who are curious about the intersections of music, computer science and digital technology. It is included in the LUC Core Curriculum under "Quantitative and qualitative analysis and research methods." We will apply some numerical and scientific thinking towards sound and music, but also peek into some of the creative and philosophical implications of capturing or generating sound, analyzing and rearranging its fundamental components, and re-synthesizing it as an audible phenomenon. Most importantly, this course will emphasize the connections between the digital, musical, physical, and emotional worlds.

## What is "Digital Music?"
*Music made with and by computers*

Broadly defined, "digital music" could encompass any form of music (making, listening, distribution) that involves digital technology of some kind. That's far too broad for this class. 

I'm going to define Digital Music as music that is created by humans with computer-based tools or assistance, or possibly generated algorithmically by computers. It is music that exists primarily in the form of data structures, processed and stored by computers.

A lot of the music you hear today is created, or at least modified, using digital technologies. For most of us, music is accessed and heard through some kind of digital medium (Internet streaming, digital audio playback, etc). This class can't cover everything, so we're going to leave out the technical details behind internet streaming, studio recording, and advanced studio production techniques.

## What this course is NOT

This course is not an introduction to music studio production techniques or songwriting. We will do a series of exercises using Soundtrap, an online Digital Audio Workstation (DAW), which has many of the elements of a professional production application, but is fairly limited. We use it in this course because it is accessible, user-friendly, and inexpensive. The idea is to give you a taste of music production in the linear DAW environment without the expense of dedicated software in a studio environment. 

## So what is this course then?

This course is more like a "behind the scenes" or "under the hood" look at digital audio and music systems from the computer science, coding, audio theory perspective (hence the COMP prefix). Our approach to musical creativity will be from the world of digital music programming, i.e., the interdisciplinary crossing of Computer Science and Music. We will spend some time examining the nature of sound, the processes and theory behind digital audio systems, and various techniques and tools for sound sampling, synthesis, sequencing, automation, and encoding musical data structures.

## Do I need to be a programmer or trained musician?

No. I'm designing this course to include everyone, regardless of musical or technical background. There will be many interactive activities in this course. Some will be done as a group and others will be individual activities using online or freely available resources. In some cases, you will do some targeted coding, but you will not be required to write complex programs on your own. The main requirement for this course is curiosity and a willingness to try things.