<link href="../../markdown.css" rel="stylesheet"></link> 

[2. Digital Audio](2.audio.html)

# 2.1 Turning Sound into Numbers

Digitizing anything means, literally, turning it into numbers (digits). In the context of current computing systems, that means encoding data in a stream of binary numbers (1s and 0s). Computers are necessary in this process, not only for the encoding process, but also for storing, processing, retrieving, and interpreting that data. File formats, data structures, and data interpreters must be very precise in order to make sense of the stream of binary numbers representing anything from a sound to a stock report, to an image of the *Mona Lisa.*

For instance, in some graphics systems, the color blue might be represented as
`000000000000000011111111`. That's a stream of 24 binary digits (or "bits").

How do you know it's "blue?" Well, it's important to know where the color code begins. *If* you start at the left and treat the first 8 bits as 'red' (all 0s, so no red!) and then the next eight bits as 'green' (all 0s, so no green!) and then the last eight bits as 'blue' and you know that a series of 1s in that chunk means "turn the blue all the way up" then you can confidently interpret that stream of data as being the code for blue. Thanks goodness computers can do this for us!

One of the amazing things about binary data is that it can be copied exactly, stored, processed, and retrieved without any degradiation. Digital data in binary format is extremely portable and accessible. In a networked computing system, data can go anywhere with almost no need for physical media.

So how does that work with sound? 

[2.1.1 Digital Audio Theory](2.1.1.theory.html)

[2.1.2 Digital Audio Editing](2.1.2.editing.html)

[2.1.3 Sound File Formats](2.1.3.formats.html)
