<link href="../../markdown.css" rel="stylesheet"></link> 

# 2.1.4 Amplitude/Loudness

When a sound wave travels through the air, molecules are **displaced** from their equillibrium, or resting point and then return to equillibrium as the sound dissipates. As we have discussed, the frequency of air displacement, or oscillation, determines its apparent pitch. But the *amount* of displacement is what determines its **volume**. This is measured as intensity of the sound (the maximum displacement of air molecules in a sound wave). Imagine quiet sounds as tiny ripples and loud sounds as towering surf.

The amplitude of a wave is generally correlated to its **perceived loudness**, but the reality of how we perceive loudness is complex. We often measure loudness in decibels (dB) which is a *ratio* of two numbers, scaled logarithmically. When we talk about the volume level of a sound in space, we are talking about "sound pressure levels" in numerical terms that correlate to human comfort. Listening to music at 85dB (SPL) is pretty loud, but tolerable for quite some time. 70 dB would be normal converastion level. Anything over 96 dB gets uncomfortable, and 120 dB is the threshold of pain. It's not unlike the Fahrenheit scale for temperature.

Different decibel scales are used for different applications. A decibel measurement is *always* a comparison against a standard reference point

>**dBSPL** - Sound Pressure Level (acoustic sound in the air, the reference point is 20 micro-Pascals)<br> 
**dBFS** - Full Scale (in a digital audio system, the reference is 0, all sound measurements are negative values)<br>
**dBV** - Volt (used in analog audio equipment. 0 dB is 1 Volt)<br>
**dBu** - Unloaded (used in analog audio equipment. 0 dB is 0.775 Volts)<br>
**dBm** - Milliwatts (used in radio and microwave communication, refenced to 1 milliwatt)
