<link href="../../markdown.css" rel="stylesheet"></link> 

# Alvin Lucier: I Am Sitting in a Room (1969)
*What if these walls had ears?*

Alvin Lucier (1931-2021) was an American composer and educator who worked on the experimental fringe of new classical music. He began experimenting with electronics in the 1960s with a group of like-minded composers and musicians, as part of the Sonic Arts Union.

Lucier recorded himself, originally in 1969, giving a short narration on the very process of the composition in which it appears. As his recorded speech is re-recorded, over an over again, via loudspeakers, microphone and tape recorder, the natural acoustics of the room intervene. Because each room has certain natural resonant frequencies due to size and geometry, those frequencies are accentuated while all others die away. What begins as speech ends as an ethereal, undulating texture of pure tones - a melting of personality into its environment to become a kind of natural music.

Lucier points out in his narration that his aim isn't simply to highlight an interesting scientific premise, but rather to use this as a vehicle to erase his own imperfections. "I Am Sitting in a Room" is generally considered an early masterpiece of American Minimalist tape music.

> "I am sitting in a room different from the one you are in now. I am recording the sound of my speaking voice and I am going to play it back into the room again and again until the resonant frequencies of the room reinforce themselves so that any semblance of my speech, with perhaps the exception of rhythm, is destroyed. What you will hear, then, are the natural resonant frequencies of the room articulated by speech. I regard this activity not so much as a demonstration of a physical fact, but more as a way to smooth out any irregularities my speech might have."

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/fAxHlLK3Oyk?si=tjr-4wc8fJALb8aR" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe><p></p>


Lars Gotrich, <a href="https://www.npr.org/2021/12/01/1060591230/alvin-lucier-inquisitive-and-innovative-composer-has-died-at-90" target = "_blank">Obituaries: Alvin Lucier, inquisitive and innovative composer, has died at 90. </a> NPR, December 1, 2021