<link href="../../markdown.css" rel="stylesheet"></link> 

[2. Digital Audio](2.audio.html)

# 2.2.3 Steve Reich: *Different Trains*
*Music for string quartet with sampled sounds and voices*

> AS OUR CENTURY NEARS AN end, it seems a good bet that Steve Reich will turn out to be the oldest 20th-century composer in whom 21st-century musicians will find a kindred spirit. - Richard Taruskin (<a href = "https://www.nytimes.com/1997/08/24/arts/a-sturdy-musical-bridge-to-the-21st-century.html" target="_blank">"A Sturdy Musical Bridge to the 21st Century,"</a> *New York Times*, Aug. 24, 1997)

Classical muisic in the late 20th century was all about experimentation and pushing boundaries. Composers often sought to continue their traditions in some ways while at the same time breaking with conventions of the past. For many composers, recorded sound and electronic processing inspired new ways of composing and performing music. 

<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steve_Reich" target="_blank">Steve Reich</a> (b. 1936) is an American composer most closely associated with "minimalism" (along with Philip Glass, La Monte Young, and Terry Riley). Many of Reich's early works used tape recorders and loops to gradually process pre-recorded sounds. The most notable of the "tape loop" pieces are *It's Gonna Rain* (1965) and *Come Out* (1966), both of which use spoken word recordings and a musical structure based on looping and gradual phasing processes. All of this work was done with analog tape recorders.

In the late 1980s, Reich had moved into a new phase of composition, exploring among other things his Jewish roots. At some point he began to reflect on his early childhood, travelling by train between his divorced parents in New York and Los Angeles, from 1937 to 1941. He realized that at that same time in Europe, Jewish children were travelling on very *different trains.* 

In 1988, Reich composed *Different Trains* for string quartet with the help of a digital sampler. In performance, the string quartet plays live with Reich's sound collage (a backing tape), including multi-tracked strings, the sounds of train whistles, sirens, and warning bells, and most importantly, recorded voices. The voices are his governess that accompanied him on his trips across the US, a Pullman Porter that worked on those trains at the time, and the voices of several Holocaust survivors.

What's technically innovative about *Different Trains* is the use of sampled voices to generate the melodies played by the string quartet. The text is an impressionistic collage of fragments of each interviewee reminiscing about train travel, the war, and emmigration to America after the war. As each voice sample is introduced, it is mimicked by either the viola or cello, turning the speech rhythm and tonal cadence into a melodic motive. The spoken samples are otherwise unprocessed. 

The emotional and imaginitative impact of *Different Trains* goes far beyond the mere use of samplers or other technologies for their own sake. What makes this work powerful and important is the very understated and matter-of-fact statements, musically highlighted and embedded within an intense musical structure, with the backdrop of one of the 20th century's greatest horrors. *Different Trains* does not tell you what to think and has no specific lesson to teach. The samplers and the string quartet allow the voices of the past to tell a story in their own words, but more forcefully.

To quote Richard Taruskin one more time:
> He has composed the only adequate musical response -- one of the few adequate artistic responses in any medium -- to the Holocaust.


