<link href="../../markdown.css" rel="stylesheet"></link> 

[TOC](../../toc.html)

# 3. Synthesis

*Generating sound from numbers*

Electronic music synthesizers are nothing new, but they're not that old either in the grand scheme of musical history. One of the earliest electronic musical instruments was the "Telharmonium" created by Thaddeus Cahill in the 1890s. Before that, musical sound was pretty much exclusively created by physical, acoustic means: vibrating strings, air columns, membranes, or other objects.

But a fluctuating voltage can mimic the air-pressure fluctuations that produce sound. An "oscillator" can produce a continuously varying signal that, when used to drive a loudspeaker, can generate a tone with a distinct pitch and timbre. Connect that to some kind of control mechanism (like a keyboard) and you have a musical instrument that is completely electronic in nature.

A digital synthesizer begins with numbers. Instead of directly generating a fluctuating voltage (analog signal), a digital synth begins with a mathematical formula for describing a wave form, which is then converted to an analog signal that can drive your headphones or loudspeakers. The *algorithms* (procedures for generating a sound) and *parameters* (specific settings and options) for digital synthesis can therefore be stored, edited, and saved as digital data files.

In the next few pages, we will get into some of the details of digital synthesis and give you a chance to edit (and save!) a synthesizer sound of your own.

Next:
* 3.1 [Synthesis Theory](3.1.synth-theory.html)
* 3.2 [Synthesizer History](3.2.synth-history.html)
* 3.3 [Listening for Synths in Music](3.3.synth-listening.html)
* 3.4 [Create and edit a synth patch](3.4.synth-editing.html)